Let fame, that all huntafter in their lives,
Live register'd upon ourbrazen tombs
And then grace us in thedisgrace of death;
When, spite of cormorantdevouring Time,
The endeavor of thispresent breath may buy
That honour which shallbate his scythe's keen edge
And make us heirs of alleternity.
Therefore, braveconquerors,--for so you are,
That war against your ownaffections
And the huge army of theworld's desires,--
Our late edict shallstrongly stand in force:
Navarre shall be thewonder of the world;
Our court shall be alittle Academe,
Still and contemplative inliving art.
You three, Biron, Dumain,and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years'term to live with me
My fellow-scholars, and tokeep those statutes
That are recorded in thisschedule here:
Your oaths are pass'd; andnow subscribe your names,
That his own hand maystrike his honour down
That violates the smallestbranch herein:
If you are arm'd to do assworn to do,
Subscribe to your deepoaths, and keep it too.
I am resolved; 'tis but athree years' fast:
The mind shall banquet,though the body pine:
My loving lord, Dumain ismortified:
The grosser manner ofthese world's delights
He throws upon the grossworld's baser slaves:
To love, to wealth, topomp, I pine and die;
With all these living inphilosophy.
I can but say theirprotestation over;
So much, dear liege, Ihave already sworn,
That is, to live and studyhere three years.
But there are other strictobservances;
As, not to see a woman inthat term,
Which I hope well is notenrolled there;
And one day in a week totouch no food
And but one meal on everyday beside,
The which I hope is notenrolled there;
And then, to sleep butthree hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink ofall the day--
When I was wont to thinkno harm all night
And make a dark night tooof half the day--
Which I hope well is notenrolled there:
O, these are barren tasks,too hard to keep,
Not to see ladies, study,fast, not sleep!
Your oath is pass'd topass away from these.
Let me say no, my liege,an if you please:
I only swore to study withyour grace
And stay here in your courtfor three years' space.
You swore to that, Biron,and to the rest.
By yea and nay, sir, thenI swore in jest.
What is the end of study?let me know.
Why, that to know, whichelse we should not know.
Things hid and barr'd, youmean, from common sense?
Ay, that is study'sgodlike recompense.
Come on, then; I willswear to study so,
To know the thing I amforbid to know:
As thus,--to study where Iwell may dine,
When I to feast expresslyam forbid;
Or study where to meetsome mistress fine,
When mistresses fromcommon sense are hid;
Or, having sworn too harda keeping oath,
Study to break it and notbreak my troth.
If study's gain be thusand this be so,
Study knows that which yetit doth not know:
Swear me to this, and Iwill ne'er say no.
These be the stops thathinder study quite
And train our intellectsto vain delight.
Why, all delights arevain; but that most vain,
Which with pain purchaseddoth inherit pain:
As, painfully to pore upona book
To seek the light of truth;while truth the while
Doth falsely blind theeyesight of his look:
Light seeking light dothlight of light beguile:
So, ere you find wherelight in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark bylosing of your eyes.
Study me how to please theeye indeed
By fixing it upon a fairereye,
Who dazzling so, that eyeshall be his heed
And give him light that itwas blinded by.
These earthly godfathersof heaven's lights
That give a name to everyfixed star
Have no more profit oftheir shining nights
Than those that walk andwot not what they are.
Too much to know is toknow nought but fame;
And every godfather cangive a name.
How well he's read, toreason against reading!
Proceeded well, to stopall good proceeding!
Well, sit you out: gohome, Biron: adieu.
No, my good lord; I havesworn to stay with you:
And though I have forbarbarism spoke more
Than for that angelknowledge you can say,
Yet confident I'll keepwhat I have swore
And bide the penance ofeach three years' day.
Give me the paper; let meread the same;
And to the strict'stdecrees I'll write my name.
How well this yieldingrescues thee from shame!
'Item, That no woman shallcome within a
mile of my court:' Haththis been proclaimed?
Four days ago.
Let's see the penalty.
'On pain of losing her tongue.'Who devised this penalty?
Marry, that did I.
Sweet lord, and why?
To fright them hence withthat dread penalty.
A dangerous law againstgentility!
'Item, If any man be seento talk with a woman
within the term of threeyears, he shall endure such
public shame as the rest of thecourt can possibly devise.'
This article, my liege,yourself must break;
For well you know herecomes in embassy
The French king's daughterwith yourself to speak--
A maid of grace andcomplete majesty--
About surrender up ofAquitaine
To her decrepit, sick andbedrid father:
What say you, lords? Why,this was quite forgot.
So study evermore isovershot:
We must of force dispensewith this decree;
She must lie here on merenecessity.
Necessity will make us allforsworn
Three thousand times withinthis three years' space;
If I break faith, thisword shall speak for me;
I am forsworn on 'merenecessity.'
So to the laws at large Iwrite my name:
And he that breaks them inthe least degree
Stands in attainder ofeternal shame:
Suggestions are to otheras to me;
But I believe, although Iseem so loath,
I am the last that willlast keep his oath.
But is there no quickrecreation granted?
Ay, that there is. Ourcourt, you know, is haunted
With a refined travellerof Spain;
A man in all the world'snew fashion planted,
That hath a mint ofphrases in his brain;
One whom the music of hisown vain tongue
Doth ravish likeenchanting harmony;
A man of complements, whomright and wrong
Have chose as umpire oftheir mutiny:
This child of fancy, thatArmado hight,
For interim to our studiesshall relate
In high-born words theworth of many a knight
From tawny Spain lost inthe world's debate.
How you delight, my lords,I know not, I;
But, I protest, I love tohear him lie
And I will use him for myminstrelsy.
Boy, what sign is it whena man of great spirit
grows melancholy?
A great sign, sir, that hewill look sad.
Why, sadness is one and theself-same thing, dear imp.
No, no; O Lord, sir, no.
How canst thou partsadness and melancholy,
my tender juvenal?
By a familiar demonstration ofthe working, my tough senior.
Why tough senior? whytough senior?
Why tender juvenal? whytender juvenal?
I spoke it, tender juvenal,as a congruent epitheton
appertaining to thy young days,which we may nominate tender.
And I, tough senior, as anappertinent title to your
old time, which we mayname tough.
Pretty and apt.
How mean you, sir? Ipretty, and my saying apt?
or I apt, and my saying pretty?
Thou pretty, becauselittle.
Little pretty, becauselittle. Wherefore apt?
And therefore apt, becausequick.
Speak you this in mypraise, master?
In thy condign praise.
I will praise an eel withthe same praise.
What, that an eel isingenious?
That an eel is quick.
I do say thou art quick inanswers: thou heatest my blood.
I am answered, sir.
I love not to be crossed.
You are a gentleman and agamester, sir.
I confess both: they areboth the varnish of a
complete man.
I have promised to study threeyears with the duke.
But I hereupon confess Iam in love: and as it is
base for a soldier to love,
so am I in lovewith a base wench.
If drawing my swordagainst the humour
of affection would deliverme from the reprobate
thought of it, I wouldtake Desire prisoner,
and ransom him toany French courtier
for a new-devised courtesy.
I think scorn to sigh: methinksI should outswear Cupid.
Comfort, me, boy: what greatmen have been in love?
Hercules, master.
Most sweet Hercules! Moreauthority, dear boy,
name more; and, sweet my child,let them be men of good
repute and carriage.
Samson, master: he was aman of good carriage,
great carriage, for he carriedthe town-gates on his back
like a porter: and he wasin love.
O well-knit Samson!strong-jointed Samson!
I do excel thee in my rapier
as thou didst me incarrying gates.
I am in love too.
Who was Samson'slove, my dear Moth?
A woman, master.
Of what complexion?
Of the sea-water green,sir.
Is that one of the fourcomplexions?
As I have read, sir; andthe best of them too.
I do love that country girlthat I took in the
park with the rational hindCostard: she deserves well.
My spirit growsheavy in love.
A letter from themagnificent Armado.
How low soever the matter, Ihope in God for high words.
A high hope for a low heaven:God grant us patience!
To hear? or forbearhearing?
The matter is to me, sir,as concerning Jaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I wastaken with the manner.
In what manner?
In manner and form following,sir; all those three:
I was seen with herin the manor-house,
sitting with her upon the form,
and taken followingher into the park;
which, put together, is inmanner and form following.
Now, sir, for the manner,--
it is the manner of a manto speak to a woman:
for the form,-- in some form.
For the following, sir?
As it shall followin my correction:
and God defend the right!
Will you hear this letterwith attention?
As we would hear anoracle.
Such is the simplicity of manto hearken after the flesh.
'Great deputy, thewelkin's vicegerent and
sole dominator of Navarre,my soul's earth's god,
and body's fosteringpatron.'
Not a word of Costard yet.
'So it is,'--
It may be so: but if hesay it is so, he is,
in telling true, but so.
Peace!
Be to me and every manthat dares not fight!
No words!
Of other men's secrets, Ibeseech you.
'So it is, besieged withsable-coloured melancholy,
I did commend theblack-oppressing humour
to the most wholesome physicof thy health-giving air;
and, as I am a gentleman,betook myself to walk.
The time when. Aboutthe sixth hour;
when beasts most graze, birdsbest peck, and men sit down
to that nourishmentwhich is called supper:
so much for the time when.Now for the ground which;
which, I mean, I walked upon:it is y-cleped thy park.
Then for the place where;where, I mean, I did encounter
that obscene and preposterousevent, that draweth
from my snow-white penthe ebon-coloured ink,
which here thou viewest,beholdest, surveyest, or seest;
but to the place where; itstandeth north-north-east
and by east from the westcorner of thy curious-
knotted garden: there didI see that low-spirited
swain, that base minnow ofthy mirth,'--
Who?
Me?
'that unletteredsmall-knowing soul,'--
'that shallow vassal,'--
Still me?
'which, as I remember,hight Costard,'--
O, me!
'sorted and consorted,contrary to thy
established proclaimededict and continent canon,
which with,--O, with--
but with this I passionto say wherewith,--
With a wench.
'with a child of ourgrandmother Eve,
a female; or, for thy moresweet understanding, a woman.
Him I, as my ever-esteemedduty pricks me on,
have sent to thee, to receivethe meed of punishment,
by thy sweet grace'sofficer, Anthony Dull;
a man of good repute, carriage,bearing, and estimation.'
'Me, an't shall pleaseyou; I am Anthony Dull.
'For Jaquenetta,--so isthe weaker vessel
called which I apprehendedwith the aforesaid swain,--
I keep her as a vesselof the law's fury;
and shall, at the leastof thy sweet notice,
bring her to trial. Thine, inall compliments of devoted
and heart-burning heat ofduty.
ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'
This is not so well as Ilooked for, but the best
that ever I heard.
Ay, the best for theworst. But, sirrah,
what say you to this?
Sir, I confess the wench.
Did you hear theproclamation?
I do confess much of thehearing it but little of
the marking of it.
It was proclaimed ayear's imprisonment,
to be taken with a wench.
I was taken with none, sir:I was taken with a damsel.
Well, it was proclaimed'damsel.'
This was no damsel, neither,sir; she was a virgin.
It is so varied, too; forit was proclaimed 'virgin.'
If it were, I denyher virginity:
I was taken with a maid.
This maid will not serveyour turn, sir.
This maid will serve myturn, sir.
Sir, I will pronounceyour sentence:
you shall fast a weekwith bran and water.
I had rather pray a monthwith mutton and porridge.
And Don Armado shall beyour keeper.
My Lord Biron, see himdeliver'd o'er:
Sir, the duke's pleasure is,that you keep Costard safe:
and you must suffer himto take no delight
nor no penance; but a' mustfast three days a week.
For this damsel, I mustkeep her at the park:
she is allowed for theday-woman. Fare you well.
I do betray myself withblushing. Maid!
Man?
I will visit thee at thelodge.
That's hereby.
I know where it issituate.
Lord, how wise you are!
I will tell thee wonders.
With that face?
I love thee.
So I heard you say.
And so, farewell.
Fair weather after you!
Come, Jaquenetta, away!
Villain, thou shaltfast for thy offences
ere thou be pardoned.
Well, sir, I hope, when Ido it, I shall do it on a
full stomach.
Thou shalt be heavilypunished.
I am more bound to you thanyour fellows, for they
are but lightly rewarded.
Take away this villain;shut him up.
Come, you transgressingslave; away!
Let me not be pent up, sir:I will fast, being loose.
No, sir; that were fast andloose: thou shalt to prison.
Well, if ever I do see themerry days of desolation
that I have seen, someshall see.
What shall some see?
Nay, nothing, Master Moth,but what they look upon.
It is not for prisoners to betoo silent in their words;
and therefore I willsay nothing: I thank
God I have as littlepatience as another man;
and therefore I can be quiet.
I do affect the veryground, which is base,
where her shoe, which isbaser, guided by her foot,
which is basest, doth tread.I shall be forsworn,
which is a great argumentof falsehood, if I love.
And how can that be true lovewhich is falsely attempted?
Love is a familiar;Love is a devil:
there is no evil angel but Love.Yet was Samson so tempted,
and he had anexcellent strength;
yet was Solomon so seduced,and he had a very good wit.
Cupid's butt-shaft is toohard for Hercules' club;
and therefore too much oddsfor a Spaniard's rapier.
Adieu, valour! rust rapier!
be still, drum! for yourmanager is in love;
yea, he loveth. Assist me,some extemporal god of rhyme,
for I am sure I shall turnsonnet. Devise, wit;
write, pen; for I am forwhole volumes in folio.
Now, madam, summon up yourdearest spirits:
Consider who the king yourfather sends,
To whom he sends, andwhat's his embassy:
Yourself, held precious inthe world's esteem,
To parley with the soleinheritor
Of all perfections that aman may owe,
Matchless Navarre; theplea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowryfor a queen.
Be now as prodigal of alldear grace
As Nature was in makinggraces dear
When she did starve thegeneral world beside
And prodigally gave themall to you.
Good Lord Boyet, mybeauty, though but mean,
Needs not the paintedflourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought byjudgement of the eye,
Not utter'd by base saleof chapmen's tongues:
I am less proud to hearyou tell my worth
Than you much willing tobe counted wise
In spending your wit inthe praise of mine.
But now to task thetasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant,all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad, Navarrehath made a vow,
Till painful study shalloutwear three years,
No woman may approach hissilent court:
Therefore to's seemeth ita needful course,
Before we enter hisforbidden gates,
To know his pleasure; andin that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness,we single you
As our best-moving fairsolicitor.
Tell him, the daughter ofthe King of France,
On serious business,craving quick dispatch,
Importunes personalconference with his grace:
Haste, signify so much;while we attend,
Like humble-visagedsuitors, his high will.
Proud of employment,willingly I go.
All pride is willingpride, and yours is so.
Who are the votaries, myloving lords,
That are vow-fellows withthis virtuous duke?
Lord Longaville is one.
Know you the man?
I know him, madam: at amarriage-feast,
Between Lord Perigort andthe beauteous heir
Of Jaques Falconbridge,solemnized
In Normandy, saw I thisLongaville:
Well, a man of sovereign partshe is esteem'd;
Well fitted in arts,glorious in arms:
Nothing becomes him illthat he would well.
The only soil of his fairvirtue's gloss,
If virtue's gloss willstain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matchedwith too blunt a will;
Whose edge hath power tocut, whose will still wills
It should none spare thatcome within his power.
Some merry mocking lord,belike; is't so?
They say so most that mosthis humours know.
Such short-lived wits dowither as they grow.
Who are the rest?
The young Dumain, awell-accomplished youth,
Of all that virtue lovefor virtue loved:
Most power to do mostharm, least knowing ill;
For he hath wit to make anill shape good,
And shape to win gracethough he had no wit.
Another of these studentsat that time
Was there with him, if Ihave heard a truth.
Biron they call him; but amerrier man,
Within the limit ofbecoming mirth,
I never spent an hour'stalk withal:
His eye begets occasionfor his wit;
For every object that theone doth catch
The other turns to amirth-moving jest,
Which his fair tongue,conceit's expositor,
Delivers in such apt andgracious words
That aged ears play truantat his tales
And younger hearings arequite ravished;
So sweet and voluble ishis discourse.
God bless my ladies! arethey all in love,
That every one her ownhath garnished
With such bedeckingornaments of praise?
Here comes Boyet.
Now, what admittance,lord?
Navarre had notice of yourfair approach;
And he and his competitorsin oath
Were all address'd to meetyou, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thusmuch I have learnt:
He rather means to lodgeyou in the field,
Like one that comes hereto besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensationfor his oath,
To let you enter hisunpeopled house.
Here comes Navarre.
Fair princess, welcome tothe court of Navarre.
'Fair' I give you backagain; and 'welcome'
I have not yet: the roof of thiscourt is too high to be yours;
and welcome to the widefields too base to be mine.
You shall be welcome,madam, to my court.
I will be welcome, then:conduct me thither.
Hear me, dear lady; I havesworn an oath.
Our Lady help my lord!he'll be forsworn.
Not for the world, fairmadam, by my will.
Why, will shall break it;will and nothing else.
Your ladyship is ignorantwhat it is.
Were my lord so, hisignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledgemust prove ignorance.
I hear your grace hathsworn out house-keeping:
Tis deadly sin to keepthat oath, my lord,
And sin to break it.
But pardon me. I am toosudden-bold:
To teach a teacher illbeseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read thepurpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me inmy suit.
Madam, I will, if suddenlyI may.
You will the sooner, thatI were away;
For you'll prove perjuredif you make me stay.
Did not I dance with youin Brabant once?
I know you did.
How needless was it thento ask the question!
You must not be so quick.
'Tis 'long of you that spurme with such questions.
Your wit's too hot, it speedstoo fast, 'twill tire.
Not till it leave therider in the mire.
What time o' day?
The hour that fools shouldask.
Now fair befall your mask!
Fair fall the face itcovers!
And send you many lovers!
Amen, so you be none.
Nay, then will I be gone.
Madam, your father heredoth intimate
The payment of a hundredthousand crowns;
Being but the one half ofan entire sum
Disbursed by my father inhis wars.
But say that he or we, asneither have,
Received that sum, yetthere remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more;in surety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine isbound to us,
Although not valued to themoney's worth.
If then the king yourfather will restore
But that one half which isunsatisfied,
We will give up our rightin Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendshipwith his majesty.
But that, it seems, helittle purposeth,
For here he doth demand tohave repaid
A hundred thousand crowns;and not demands,
On payment of a hundredthousand crowns,
To have his title live inAquitaine;
Which we much rather haddepart withal
And have the money by ourfather lent
Than Aquitaine so geldedas it is.
Dear Princess, were nothis requests so far
From reason's yielding,your fair self should make
A yielding 'gainst somereason in my breast
And go well satisfied toFrance again.
You do the king my fathertoo much wrong
And wrong the reputationof your name,
In so unseeming to confessreceipt
Of that which hath sofaithfully been paid.
I do protest I never heardof it;
And if you prove it, I'llrepay it back
Or yield up Aquitaine.
We arrest your word.
Boyet, you can produceacquittances
For such a sum fromspecial officers
Of Charles his father.
Satisfy me so.
So please your grace, thepacket is not come
Where that and otherspecialties are bound:
To-morrow you shall have asight of them.
It shall suffice me: atwhich interview
All liberal reason I willyield unto.
Meantime receive suchwelcome at my hand
As honour without breachof honour may
Make tender of to thy trueworthiness:
You may not come, fairprincess, in my gates;
But here without you shallbe so received
As you shall deem yourselflodged in my heart,
Although so denied fairharbour in my house.
Your own good thoughtsexcuse me, and farewell:
To-morrow shall we visityou again.
Sweet health and fairdesires consort your grace!
Thy own wish wish I theein every place!
Sir, I pray you, a word:what lady is that same?
The heir of Alencon,Katharine her name.
A gallant lady. Monsieur,fare you well.
I beseech you a word: whatis she in the white?
A woman sometimes, an yousaw her in the light.
Perchance light in thelight. I desire her name.
She is an heir ofFalconbridge.
What's her name in thecap?
Rosaline, by good hap.
Is she wedded or no?
To her will, sir, or so.
You are welcome, sir:adieu.
Farewell to me, sir, andwelcome to you.
That last is Biron, themerry madcap lord:
Not a word with him but ajest.
And every jest but a word.
It was well done of you totake him at his word.
I was as willing to grappleas he was to board.
Two hot sheeps, marry.
And wherefore not ships?
No sheep, sweet lamb, unlesswe feed on your lips.
You sheep, and I pasture:shall that finish the jest?
So you grant pasture forme.
Not so, gentle beast:
My lips are no common,though several they be.
Belonging to whom?
To my fortunes and me.
Good wits will be jangling;but, gentles, agree:
This civil war of witswere much better used
On Navarre and his book-men;for here 'tis abused.
If my observation, whichvery seldom lies,
By the heart's still rhetoricdisclosed with eyes,
Deceive me not now,Navarre is infected.
With what?
With that which we loversentitle affected.
Your reason?
Why, all his behaviors didmake their retire
To the court of his eye,peeping thorough desire:
His heart, like an agate,with your print impress'd,
Proud with his form, inhis eye pride express'd:
His tongue, all impatientto speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste inhis eyesight to be;
All senses to that sensedid make their repair,
To feel only looking onfairest of fair:
Methought all his senseswere lock'd in his eye,
As jewels in crystal forsome prince to buy;
Who, tendering their own worthfrom where they were glass'd,
Did point you to buy them,along as you pass'd:
His face's own margent didquote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyesenchanted with gazes.
I'll give you Aquitaineand all that is his,
An you give him for mysake but one loving kiss.
Thou art an old love-mongerand speakest skilfully.
He is Cupid's grandfatherand learns news of him.
Then was Venus like her mother,for her father is but grim.
If love make me forsworn,how shall I swear to love?
Ah, never faith could hold,if not to beauty vow'd!
Though to myself forsworn,to thee I'll faithful prove:
Those thoughts to me were oaks,to thee like osiers bow'd.
Study his bias leaves andmakes his book thine eyes,
Where all those pleasures livethat art would comprehend:
(♪ singing in French)
Sweet air! Go, tendernessof years; take this key,
give enlargement to the swain,bring him festinately hither:
He must carry me a letter to mylove.
A message well sympathized;
Horse to be ambassador foran ass.
Ha, ha! what sayest thou?
Marry, sir, you must sendthe ass upon the horse,
for he is veryslow-gaited. But I go sir.
As swift as lead.
The meaning, prettyingenious?
Is not lead a metal heavy,dull, and slow?
Minime, honest master; orrather, master, no.
I say lead is slow.
You are too swift, sir, tosay so:
Is that lead slow which isfired from a gun?
A most acute juvenal;voluble and free of grace!
By thy favour, sweet welkin,I must sigh in thy face:
Most rude melancholy,valour gives thee place.
A wonder, master! here's acostard broken in a shin.
Some enigma, some riddle:come, thy l'envoy; begin.
No enigma, no riddle, nol'envoy; no salve in the mail,
O, sir, plantain,a plain plantain!
no l'envoy, no l'envoy; nosalve, sir, but a plantain!
By virtue, thouenforcest laughter;
thy silly thought my spleen;the heaving of my lungs
provokes me toridiculous smiling.
O, pardon me, my stars!
Doth the inconsiderate takesalve for l'envoy, for a salve?
Do the wise think them other?is not l'envoy a salve?
No, page: it is some epilogueor discourse, to make plain
Some obscure precedencethat hath tofore been sain.
I will example it:
The fox, the ape, and thehumble-bee,
Were still at odds, beingbut three.
There's the moral. Now thel'envoy.
I will add the l'envoy.Say the moral again.
The fox, the ape, and thehumble-bee,
Were still at odds, beingbut three.
Until the goose came outof door,
And stay'd the odds byadding four.
Now will I begin your moral,
and do you followwith my l'envoy.
The fox, the ape, and thehumble-bee,
Were still at odds, beingbut three.
Until the goose came outof door,
Staying the odds by addingfour.
A good l'envoy,ending in the goose:
would you desire more?
How did this argumentbegin?
By saying here's a costardbroken in a shin.
Then call'd you for thel'envoy.
True, and I for a plantain:
But tell me; how was therea costard broken in a shin?
I will tell you sensibly.
Thou hast no feelingof it, Moth:
I will speak that l'envoy:
I Costard, running out,that was safely within,
Fell over the thresholdand broke my shin.
We will talk no more ofthis matter.
Till there be more matterin the shin.
Sirrah Costard, I willenfranchise thee.
O, marry me to one Frances:
I smell some l'envoy,some goose, in this.
By my sweet soul, I meansetting thee at liberty,
enfreedoming thy person;thou wert immured,
restrained, captivated,bound.
True, true; and now youwill be my purgation
and let me loose.
I will give thee thy liberty,set thee from durance;
and, in lieu thereof, imposeon thee nothing but this:
bear this significant to thecountry maid Jaquenetta:
there is remuneration; forthe best ward of mine
honour is rewarding mydependents. Moth, follow.
Now will I look to hisremuneration. Remuneration!
O, that's the Latin wordfor three farthings:
three farthings--remuneration.--
'What's the priceof this inkle?'
--'One penny.'--'No, I'llgive you a remuneration:'
why, it carriesit. Remuneration!
why, it is a fairer namethan French crown.
I will never buy andsell out of this word.
O, my good knave Costard!exceedingly well met.
Pray you, sir, how muchcarnation ribbon may a man
buy for a remuneration?
What is a remuneration?
Marry, sir, halfpennyfarthing.
Why, then, three-farthingworth of silk.
I thank your worship: Godbe wi' you!
Stay, slave; I must employthee:
As thou wilt win myfavour, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that Ishall entreat.
When would you have itdone, sir?
This afternoon.
Well, I will do it, sir:fare you well.
Thou knowest not what itis.
I shall know, sir, when Ihave done it.
Why, villain, thou mustknow first.
I will come to yourworship to-morrow morning.
It must be done thisafternoon.
Hark, slave, it is butthis:
The princess comes to hunthere in the park,
And in her train there isa gentle lady;
When tongues speak sweetly,then they name her name,
And Rosaline they callher: ask for her;
And to her white hand seethou do commend
This seal'd-up counsel.There's thy guerdon; go.
Gardon, O sweet gardon!better than remuneration,
a'leven-pence farthingbetter: most sweet gardon!
I will do it sir, in print.Gardon! Remuneration!
And I, forsooth, in love! I,that have been love's whip;
A very beadle to ahumorous sigh;
A critic, nay, anight-watch constable;
A domineering pedant o'erthe boy;
Than whom no mortal somagnificent!
This whimpled, whining,purblind, wayward boy;
This senior-junior,giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid;
Regent of love-rhymes,lord of folded arms,
The anointed sovereign ofsighs and groans,
Liege of all loiterers andmalcontents,
Dread prince of plackets,king of codpieces,
Sole imperator and greatgeneral
Of trotting 'paritors:--Omy little heart:--
And I to be a corporal ofhis field,
And wear his colours likea tumbler's hoop!
What, I! I love! I sue! Iseek a wife!
A woman, that is like aGerman clock,
Still a-repairing, everout of frame,
And never going aright,being a watch,
But being watch'd that itmay still go right!
Nay, to be perjured, whichis worst of all;
And, among three, to lovethe worst of all;
A wightly wanton with avelvet brow,
With two pitch-balls stuckin her face for eyes;
Ay, and by heaven, onethat will do the deed
Though Argus were hereunuch and her guard:
And I to sigh for her! towatch for her!
To pray for her! Go to; itis a plague
That Cupid will impose formy neglect
Of his almighty dreadfullittle might.
Well, I will love, write,sigh, pray, sue and groan:
Some men must love my ladyand some Joan.
Was that the king, thatspurred his horse so hard
Against the steep uprisingof the hill?
I know not; but I think itwas not he.
Whoe'er a' was, a' show'da mounting mind.
Well, lords, to-day weshall have our dispatch:
On Saturday we will returnto France.
Then, forester, my friend,where is the bush
That we must stand andplay the murderer in?
Hereby, upon the edge ofyonder coppice;
A stand where you may makethe fairest shoot.
But come, the bow: nowmercy goes to kill,
The poor deer's blood, thatmy heart means no ill.
Here comes a member of thecommonwealth.
God dig-you-den all! Prayyou, which is the head lady?
Thou shalt know her, fellow, bythe others that have no heads.
Which is the greatestlady, the highest?
The thickest and thetallest.
The thickest and the tallest!it is so; truth is truth.
An your waist, mistress,were as slender as my wit,
One o' these maids' girdlesfor your waist should be fit.
Are not you the chief woman?you are the thickest here.
What's your will, sir?what's your will?
I have a letter from MonsieurBiron to one Lady Rosaline.
O, thy letter, thy letter!he's a good friend of mine:
Stand aside, good bearer.Boyet, you can carve;
Break up this capon.
I am bound to serve.
This letter is mistook, itimporteth none here;
It is writ to Jaquenetta.
We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the wax,and every one give ear.
'By heaven, that thou artfair, is most infallible;
true, that thou artbeauteous; truth itself,
that thou art lovely.More fairer than fair,
beautiful than beauteous,truer than truth itself,
have commiseration onthy heroical vassal!
The magnanimous and mostillustrate king Cophetua set
eye upon the pernicious andindubitate beggar Zenelophon;
and he it was thatmight rightly say,
Veni, vidi, vici; which toannothanize in the vulgar,
--O base and obscurevulgar!--videlicet,
He came, saw, and overcame:he came, one; saw two;
overcame, three. Whocame? the king:
why did he come? to see: whydid he see? to overcome:
to whom came he? to thebeggar: what saw he?
the beggar: who overcamehe? the beggar.
The conclusion is victory:on whose side? the king's.
The captive is enriched:on whose side?
the beggar's. The catastropheis a nuptial: on whose side?
the king's: no, on bothin one, or one in both.
I am the king; for sostands the comparison:
thou the beggar; for sowitnesseth thy lowliness.
What shalt thouexchange for rags? robes;
for tittles? titles;for thyself? me.
Thus, expecting thy reply, Iprofane my lips on thy foot,
my eyes on thy picture. andmy heart on thy every part.
Thine, in the dearestdesign of industry,
DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'
What plume of feathers is hethat indited this letter?
What vane? what weathercock?did you ever hear better?
I am much deceived but Iremember the style.
Else your memory is bad,going o'er it erewhile.
This Armado is a Spaniard,that keeps here in court;
A phantasime, a Monarcho,and one that makes sport
To the prince and hisbookmates.
Thou fellow, a word:
Who gave thou this letter?
I told you; my lord.
To whom shouldst thou giveit?
From my lord to my lady.
From which lord to whichlady?
From my lord Biron, a goodmaster of mine,
To a lady of France thathe call'd Rosaline.
Thou hast mistaken hisletter. Come, lords, away.
Here, sweet, put up this:'twill be thine another day.
Who is the suitor? who isthe suitor?
Shall I teach you to know?
Ay, my continent ofbeauty.
Why, she that bears thebow.
Finely put off!
My lady goes to killhorns; but, if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck, ifhorns that year miscarry.
Finely put on!
Well, then, I am theshooter.
And who is your deer?
If we choose by the horns,yourself come not near.
Finely put on, indeed!
You still wranglewith her, Boyet,
and she strikes at the brow.
But she herself is hitlower: have I hit her now?
Shall I come upon theewith an old saying,
that was a man when King Pepinof France was a little boy,
as touching the hit it?
So I may answer theewith one as old,
that was a woman when QueenGuinover of Britain was
a little wench, astouching the hit it.
Thou canst not hit it, hitit, hit it,
Thou canst not hit it, mygood man.
An I cannot, cannot,cannot,
An I cannot, another can.
O' my troth, most sweet jests!most incony vulgar wit!
When it comes so smoothlyoff, so obscenely,
as it were, so fit.
Very reverend sport, truly;
and done in the testimonyof a good conscience.
The deer was, as youknow, sanguis, in blood;
ripe as the pomewater, whonow hangeth like a jewel in
the ear of caelo, the sky,the welkin, the heaven;
and anon falleth like acrab on the face of terra,
the soil, the land, theearth.
Truly, Master Holofernes,the epithets are sweetly
varied, like a scholarat the least:
but, sir, I assure ye, it wasa buck of the first head.
Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
'Twas not a haud credo;'twas a pricket.
Most barbarous intimation!yet a kind of insinuation,
as it were, in via, inway, of explication;
facere, as it were, replication,or rather,
ostentare, as itwere, to show, his inclination,
after his undressed,unpolished,
uneducated, unpruned,untrained, or rather,
unlettered, or ratherest,unconfirmed fashion,
to insert again my haudcredo for a deer.
I said the deer was not ahaud credo; twas a pricket.
Twice-sod simplicity, hiscoctus!
O thou monster Ignorance,how deformed dost thou look!
Sir, he hath never fed ofthe dainties that are bred
in a book; he hath noteat paper, as it were;
he hath not drunk ink: hisintellect is not replenished;
he is only an animal, onlysensible in the duller parts:
And such barren plantsare set before us,
that we thankful should be,
Which we of taste and knowledgeare, for those parts which
do fructify in us morethan he.
For as it would illbecome me to be vain,
indiscreet, or a fool,
So were there a patchset on learning,
to see him in a school:But omne bene, say I;
being of an old father's mind,
Many can brook the weatherthat love not the wind.
You two are book-men: canyou tell me by your wit
What was a month oldat Cain's birth,
that's not fiveweeks old as yet?
Dictynna, goodman Dull;Dictynna, goodman Dull.
What is Dictynna?
A title to Phoebe, toLuna, to the moon.
The moon was a month oldwhen Adam was no more,
And raught not to five weekswhen he came to five-score.
The allusion holds in theexchange.
'Tis true indeed; the collusionholds in the exchange.
God comfort thycapacity! I say,
the allusion holdsin the exchange.
And I say, the pollusionholds in the exchange;
for the moon is neverbut a month old:
and I say beside that,
'twas a pricket thatthe princess killed.
Sir Nathaniel, will youhear an extemporal epitaph
on the death of the deer?
And, to humour the ignorant,
call I the deer theprincess killed a pricket.
Perge, good MasterHolofernes, perge;
so it shall please youto abrogate scurrility.
I will something affect theletter, for it argues facility.
The preyful princessprick'd and pierced
a prettypleasing pricket;
Some say a sore;but not a sore,
till now made sorewith shooting.
The dogs did yell:put L to sore,
then sorel jumps from thicket;
Or pricket sore, or else sorel;the people fall a-hooting.
If sore be sore, then L to soremakes fifty sores one sorel.
Of one sore I an hundred makeby adding but one more L.
A rare talent!
This is a gift that Ihave, simple, simple;
a foolish extravagant spirit,full of forms, figures,
shapes, objects, ideas,apprehensions, motions,
revolutions: these are begotin the ventricle of memory,
nourished in thewomb of pia mater,
and delivered upon themellowing of occasion.
But the gift is good inthose in whom it is acute,
and I am thankful for it.
Sir, I praise the Lord for you;and so may my parishioners;
for their sons arewell tutored by you,
and their daughters profitvery greatly under you:
you are a good memberof the commonwealth.
Mehercle, if theirsons be ingenuous,
they shall want no instruction;if their daughters be capable,
I will put it to them: but virsapit qui pauca loquitur;
Good master Parson, be sogood as read me this letter:
it was given me by Costard,and sent me from Don Armado:
I beseech you, read it.
Fauste, precor gelida quandopecus omne sub umbra
Ruminat,--and so forth.Ah, good old Mantuan!
I may speak of thee as thetraveller doth of Venice;
Venetia, Venetia,
Chi non ti vede non tipretia.
Old Mantuan, old Mantuan!who understandeth thee not,
loves thee not. Ut,re, sol, la, mi, fa.
Under pardon, sir, whatare the contents?
or rather, as Horace says inhis--What, my soul, verses?
Ay, sir, and very learned.
Let me hear a staff, a stanze,a verse; lege, domine.
If knowledge be the mark,to know thee shall suffice;
Well learned is that tonguethat well can thee commend,
All ignorant that soul thatsees thee without wonder;
Which is to me some praisethat I thy parts admire:
Thy eye Jove's lightning bears,thy voice his dreadful thunder,
Which not to anger bent,is music and sweet fire.
Celestial as thou art, O,pardon, love, this wrong,
That sings heaven's praisewith such an earthly tongue.
You do not find the apostraphas,and so miss the accent:
let me supervise the canzonet.
Here are only numbers ratified;but, for the elegancy,
facility, and goldencadence of poesy, caret.
Ovidius Naso was the man:and why, indeed, Naso,
Don't know.
For smelling out theodouriferous flowers of fancy,
the jerks of invention?Imitari is nothing:
so doth the hound hismaster, the ape his keeper,
the tired horse his rider.But, damosella virgin,
was this directed to you?
Ay, sir.
I will overglancethe superscript:
'To the snow-white hand of themost beauteous Lady Rosaline.'
I will look again on theintellect of the letter,
for the nomination ofthe party writing
to the person written unto:
'Your ladyship's in alldesired employment, .'
Biron.
Ohhh
Sir Nathaniel, this Biron is oneof the votaries with the king;
and here he hathframed a letter
to a sequent of thestranger queen's,
which accidentally, or bythe way of progression,
hath miscarried. Tripand go, my sweet;
deliver this paper into theroyal hand of the king:
it may concern much. Staynot thy compliment;
I forgive thy duty; adieu.
Sir, you have done this in thefear of God, very religiously;
and, as a certainfather saith,--
Sir tell me not of thefather;
But to return to theverses:
Sir Nathaniel. Did they pleaseyou?
Marvellous well for thepen.
I do dine to-day at the father'sof a certain pupil of mine;
where, if, beforerepast, it shall please
you to gratify thetable with a grace,
I will undertake,
on my privilege I have with theparents of the foresaid child
or pupil, your ben venuto;
where I will show thoseverses to be very unlearned,
savouring neither of poetry,wit, nor invention:
I beseech your society.
And thank you too; forsociety, saith the text,
is the happiness of life.
I will not love:
if I do, hang me; i' faith,I will not. O, but her eye,
--by this light, but for hereye, I would not love her;
yes, for her two eyes.Well, I do nothing
in the world but lie,and lie in my throat.
By heaven, I do love: andit hath taught me to rhyme
and to be melancholy; andhere is part of my rhyme,
and here my melancholy.Here comes one with a paper:
Ay me!
Shot, by heaven!
So sweet a kiss the golden sun
gives not to those freshmorning drops upon the rose,
As thy eye-beams, whentheir fresh rays have smote
The night of dew that onmy cheeks down flows:
Nor shines the silver moonone half so bright
Through the transparentbosom of the deep,
As doth thy face throughtears of mine give light;
What, Longaville! andreading! listen, ear.
Now, in thy likeness, onemore fool appear!
Ay me, I am forsworn!
In love, I hope: sweetfellowship in shame!
O sweet Maria, empress ofmy love!
Did not the heavenlyrhetoric of thine eye,
'Gainst whom the worldcannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to thisfalse perjury?
Vows for thee brokedeserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore; but Iwill prove,
Thou being a goddess, Iforswore not thee:
My vow was earthly, thou aheavenly love;
Thy grace being gain'dcures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath, andbreath a vapour is:
Then thou, fair sun, whichon my earth dost shine,
Exhalest this vapour-vow;in thee it is:
If broken then, it is nofault of mine:
If by me broke, what foolis not so wise
To lose an oath to win aparadise?
This is the liver-vein,which makes flesh a deity,
A green goose a goddess:pure, pure idolatry.
By whom shall I sendthis?--Company! stay.
All hid, all hid; an oldinfant play.
O most divine Kate!
O most profane coxcomb!
O that I had my wish!
And I had mine!
And I mine too, good Lord!
Amen, so I had mine: isnot that a good word?
Like a fever shereigns in my blood
and will remember'd be.
Once more I'll read theode that I have writ.
Once more I'll mark howlove can vary wit.
On a day--alack the day!--
Love, whose month is everMay,
Spied a blossom passingfair
Playing in the wanton air:
Through the velvet leavesthe wind,
All unseen, can passagefind;
That the lover, sick todeath,
Wish himself the heaven'sbreath.
Air, quoth he, thy cheeksmay blow;
Air, would I might triumphso!
But, alack, my hand issworn
Ne'er to pluck thee fromthy thorn;
Vow, alack, for youthunmeet,
Youth so apt to pluck asweet!
Do not call it sin in me,
That I am forsworn forthee;
Thou for whom Jove wouldswear
Juno but an Ethiope were;
And deny himself for Jove,
Turning mortal for thylove.
This will I send, andsomething else more plain,
That shall express my truelove's fasting pain.
O, would the king, Biron,and Longaville,
Were lovers too! Ill, toexample ill,
Would from my foreheadwipe a perjured note;
For none offend where allalike do dote.
Dumain, thy love isfar from charity
that in love's griefdesires a society.
You may look pale, but Ishould blush, I know,
To be o'erheard andtaken napping so.
You blush; ashis your case is such;
You chide at him,offending twice as much;
You do not love Maria;Longaville
Did never sonnet for hersake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathedarms athwart
His loving bosom to keepdown his heart.
I have been closelyshrouded in this book
And mark'd you both andfor you both did look:
I heard your guilty rhymes,noted well your fashion,
Saw sighs reek from you,observed your passion:
Ay me! says one; O Jove!the other cries;
One, her hairs were gold,crystal the other's eyes:
You would for paradisebreak faith, and troth;
And Jove, for your love,would infringe an oath.
What will Biron say whenthat he shall hear
Faith so infringed, whichsuch zeal did swear?
How will he scorn! howwill he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leapand laugh at it!
For all the wealth thatever I did see,
I would not have him knowso much by me.
Now step I forth to whiphypocrisy.
Ah, good my liege, I praythee, pardon me!
Good heart, what gracehast thou, thus to reprove
These worms for loving,that art most in love?
Your eyes do make nocoaches; in your tears
There is no certainprincess that appears;
You'll not be perjured,'tis a hateful thing;
Tush, none but minstrelslike of sonneting!
But are you not ashamed?nay, are you not,
All three of you, to bethus much o'ershot?
You found his mote; theking your mote did see;
But I a beam do find ineach of three.
O, what a scene of fooleryhave I seen,
Of sighs, of groans, ofsorrow and of teen!
O me, with what strictpatience have I sat,
To see a king transformedto a gnat!
To see great Herculeswhipping a gig,
And profound Solomon totune a jig,
And Nestor play atpush-pin with the boys,
And critic Timon laugh atidle toys!
Where lies thy grief, O,tell me, good Dumain?
And gentle Longaville,where lies thy pain?
And where my liege's? allabout the breast:
A caudle, ho!
Too bitter is thy jest.
Are we betray'd thus tothy over-view?
Not you to me, but Ibetray'd by you:
I, that am honest; I, thathold it sin
To break the vow I amengaged in;
I am betray'd, by keepingcompany
With moon like men, men ofinconstancy.
When shall you see mewrite a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for Joan? orspend a minute's time
In pruning me? When shallyou hear that I
Will praise a hand, afoot, a face, an eye,
A gait, a state, a brow, abreast, a waist,
A leg, a limb?
Soft! whither away sofast?
A true man or a thief thatgallops so?
I post from love: goodlover, let me go.
God bless the king!
What present hast thouthere?
Some certain treason.
What makes treason here?
I beseech your grace, letthis letter be read:
Our parson misdoubts it;'twas treason, he said.
Biron, read it over.
Where hadst thou it?
Of Costard.
How now! what is in you?why dost thou tear it?
A toy, my liege, a toy: yourgrace needs not fear it.
It did move him to passion,and therefore let's hear it.
It is Biron's writing,and here is his name.
Ah, you whoreson loggerhead!
you were born to do me shame.
Guilty, my leige, guilty! Iconfess, I confess.
What?
That you three fools lack'dme fool to make up the mess:
He, he, and you, and you,my liege, and I,
Are pick-purses in love,and we deserve to die.
O, dismiss this audience,and I shall tell you more.
Now the number is even.
True, true; we are four.
Will these turtles begone?
Hence, sirs; away!
Walk aside the true folk,and let the traitors stay.
Sweet lords, sweet lovers,O, let us embrace!
As true we are as fleshand blood can be:
The sea will ebb and flow,heaven show his face;
Young blood can not obeyan old decree:
What, did these rent linesshow some love of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Whosees the heavenly Rosaline,
That, like a rude andsavage man of Inde,
At the first opening ofthe gorgeous east,
Bows not his vassal headand strucken blind
Kisses the base groundwith obedient breast?
What peremptoryeagle-sighted eye
Dares look upon the heavenof her brow,
That is not blinded by hermajesty?
What zeal, what fury hathinspired thee now?
My love, her mistress, isa gracious moon;
She an attending star,scarce seen a light.
My eyes are then no eyes,nor I Biron:
O, but for my love, daywould turn to night!
O, 'tis the sun thatmaketh all things shine.
By heaven, thy love isblack as ebony.
Is ebony like her? O wooddivine!
A wife of such wood werefelicity.
O, who can give an oath?where is a book?
That I may swear beautydoth beauty lack,
If that she learn not ofher eye to look:
No face is fair that isnot full so black.
O paradox! Black is thebadge of hell,
The hue of dungeons andthe school of night;
And beauty's crest becomesthe heavens well.
To look like her arechimney-sweepers black.
And since her time arecolliers counted bright.
And Ethiopes of theirsweet complexion crack.
Dark needs no candles now,for dark is light.
Your mistresses dare nevercome in rain,
For fear their coloursshould be wash'd away.
'Twere good, yours did; for,sir, to tell you plain,
I'll find a fairer facenot wash'd to-day.
I'll prove her fair, ortalk till doomsday here.
No devil will fright theethen so much as she.
I never knew man hold vilestuff so dear.
Look, here's thy love: myfoot and her face see.
O, if the streets werepaved with thine eyes,
Her feet were much toodainty for such tread!
O, vile! then, as shegoes, what upward lies
The street should see asshe walk'd overhead.
But what of this? are wenot all in love?
Nothing so sure; andtherefore all forsworn.
Then leave this chat; and,good Biron, now prove
Our loving lawful, and ourfaith not torn.
Ay, marry, there; someflattery for this evil.
O, some authority how toproceed;
Some tricks, some quillets,how to cheat the devil.
Some salve for perjury.
'Tis more than need.
Have at you, then,affection's men at arms.
Consider what you firstdid swear unto,
To fast, to study, and tosee no woman;
Flat treason 'gainst thekingly state of youth.
Say, can you fast? yourstomachs are too young;
And abstinence engendersmaladies.
O, we have made a vow to study,lords,
And in that vow we haveforsworn our books.
For when would you, myliege, or you, or you,
In leaden contemplationhave found out
Such fiery numbers as theprompting eyes
Of beauty's tutors haveenrich'd you with?
Other slow arts entirelykeep the brain;
And therefore, findingbarren practisers,
Scarce show a harvest oftheir heavy toil:
But love, first learned ina lady's eyes,
Lives not alone immured inthe brain;
But, with the motion ofall elements,
Courses as swift asthought in every power,
And gives to every power adouble power,
Above their functions andhis offices.
It adds a precious seeingto the eye;
A lover's eyes will gazean eagle blind;
A lover's ear will hearthe lowest sound,
When the suspicious headof theft is stopp'd:
Love's feeling is moresoft and sensible
Than are the tender hornsof cockl'd snails;
Love's tongue proves daintyBacchus gross in taste:
For valour, is not Love aHercules,
Still climbing trees inthe Hesperides?
Subtle as Sphinx; as sweetand musical
As bright Apollo's lute,strung with his hair:
And when Love speaks, thevoice of all the gods
Makes heaven drowsy withthe harmony.
Never durst poet touch apen to write
Until his ink were temper'dwith Love's sighs;
O, then his lines wouldravish savage ears
And plant in tyrants mildhumility.
From women's eyes thisdoctrine I derive:
They sparkle still theright Promethean fire;
They are the books, thearts, the academes,
That show, contain andnourish all the world:
Else none at all in oughtproves excellent.
Then fools you were thesewomen to forswear,
Or keeping what is sworn,you will prove fools.
For wisdom's sake, a wordthat all men love,
Or for love's sake, a wordthat loves all men,
Or for men's sake, theauthors of these women,
Or women's sake, by whomwe men are men,
Let us once lose our oathsto find ourselves,
Or else we lose ourselvesto keep our oaths.
It is religion to be thusforsworn,
For charity itselffulfills the law,
And who can sever lovefrom charity?
Saint Cupid, then! and,soldiers, to the field!
Advance your standards,and upon them, lords;
Pell-mell, down with them!but be first advised,
In conflict that you getthe sun of them.
Now to plain-dealing; laythese glozes by:
Shall we resolve to woothese girls of France?
And win them too:therefore let us devise
Some entertainment forthem in their tents.
First, from the park letus conduct them thither;
Then homeward every manattach the hand
Of his fair mistress: inthe afternoon
We will with some strangepastime solace them,
Such as the shortness ofthe time can shape;
For revels, dances, masksand merry hours
Forerun fair Love, strewingher way with flowers.
Satis quod sufficit.
I praise God for you, sir:your reasons at dinner
have been sharpand sententious;
pleasant without scurrility,witty without affection,
audacious without impudency,learned without opinion,
and strange with- out heresy.
I did converse this quondam day
with a companion of the king's,who is intituled, nominated,
or called, DonAdriano de Armado.
Novi hominem tanquam te:his humour is lofty,
his discourse peremptory,his tongue filed,
his eye ambitious,his gait majestical,
and his general behavior vain,ridiculous, and thrasonical.
He is too picked, too spruce,too affected, too odd,
as it were, too peregrinate,as I may say.
A most singular and choiceepithet.
He draweth out the threadof his verbosity finer
than the stapleof his argument.
I abhor such fanaticalphantasimes, such insociable
and point-devise companions;such rackers of orthography,
as to speak dout, fine,when he should say doubt;
det, when he shouldpronounce debt,
--d, e, b, t, not d, e, t:he clepeth a calf, cauf;
(laughing throughout speech)
half, hauf; neighbour vocaturnebor; neigh abbreviated ne.
This is abhominable, --whichhe would call abbominable:
it insinuateth me of insanie:
anne intelligis, domine?to make frantic, lunatic.
Laus Deo, bene intelligo.
Bon, bon, fort bon, Priscian! alittle scratch'd, 'twill serve.
Videsne quis venit?
Video, et gaudeo.
Men of peace, wellencountered.
Most military sir,salutation.
Sir, it is the king'smost sweet pleasure
and affection to congratulatethe princess at her
pavilion in theposteriors of this day,
which the rude multitudecall the afternoon.
The posterior of theday, most generous sir,
is liable, congruent andmeasurable for the afternoon:
the word is well chosen,culled, sweet and apt,
I do assure you,sir, I do assure.
Sir, the king is a noblegentleman, and my familiar,
I do assure ye,very good friend:
for what is inward between us,let it pass.
But I must tell thee, itwill please his grace,
by the world, sometime tolean upon my poor shoulder,
and with his royal finger,thus, dally with my excrement,
with my mustachio; but,sweet heart, let that pass.
By the world, Irecount no fable:
some certain special honoursit pleaseth his greatness
to impart to Armado, asoldier, a man of travel,
that hath seen the world;but let that pass.
The very all of allis,--but, sweet heart,
I do implore secrecy,--thatthe king would have me
present the princess,sweet chuck,
with some delightfulostentation, or show,
or pageant, orantique, or firework.
Now, understanding that thecurate and your sweet self
are good at such eruptions andsudden breaking out of mirth,
as it were, I have acquaintedyou to the end withal,
to craveyour assistance.
They have been at a greatfeast of languages,
and stolen the scraps.
O, they have lived long onthe alms-basket of words.
I marvel thy master hathnot eaten thee for a word;
Sir, you shall present beforeher the Nine Worthies.
Sir Nathaniel, as concerningsome entertainment of time,
some show in the posteriorof this day, to be rendered
by our assistants, atthe king's command,
and this mostgallant, illustrate,
and learned gentleman,before the princess;
I say none so fit as topresent the Nine Worthies.
Where will you find men worthyenough to present them?
Joshua, yourself;myself, Alexander,
this gallant gentleman,Judas Maccabaeus;
the swain, by reason ofhis great limb or joint,
shall pass Pompey the Great;
the page, Hercules,--
Pardon, sir; error: heis not quantity
for that Worthy's thumb:
he is not so big asthe end of his club.
Shall I have audience? he shallpresent Hercules in minority:
his enter and exit shallbe strangling a snake;
and I will have an prologueto their purpose.
An excellent device! so, ifany of the audience hiss,
you may cry 'Welldone, Hercules!
now thou crushest the snake!'
For the rest of the Worthies?--
I will play three myself.
Thrice-worthy gentleman!
Shall I tell you a thing?
We attend.
We will have, if thisfadge not, an antique.
I beseech you, follow.
Via, goodman Dull! thou hastspoken no word all this time.
Nor understood noneneither, sir.
Allons! we will employthee.
I'll make one in a dance,or so; or I will play
On the tabour to the Worthies,and let them dance the hay.
Most dull, honest Dull! Toour sport, away!
Sweet hearts, we shall berich ere we depart,
If fairings come thusplentifully in:
A lady wall'd about withdiamonds!
Look you what I have fromthe loving king.
Madame, came nothing elsealong with that?
Nothing but this! yes, asmuch love in rhyme
As would be cramm'd up ina sheet of paper,
Writ o' both sides theleaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to sealon Cupid's name.
That was the way to makehis godhead wax,
For he hath been fivethousand years a boy.
Ay, and a shrewd unhappygallows too.
You'll ne'er be friends withhim; a' kill'd your sister.
He made her melancholy,sad, and heavy;
And so she died: had shebeen light, like you,
Of such a merry, nimble,stirring spirit,
She might ha' been agrandam ere she died:
And so may you; for alight heart lives long.
What's your dark meaning,mouse, of this light word?
A light condition in abeauty dark.
We need more light to findyour meaning out.
You'll mar the light bytaking it in snuff;
Therefore I'll darkly endthe argument.
See what you do, you doit still i' the dark.
So do not you, for you area light wench.
I weigh not you,and therefore light.
You weigh me not? O, that'syou care not for me.
Great reason; for 'pastcure is still past care.'
Well bandied both; a setof wit well play'd.
But Rosaline, you have afavour too:
Who sent it? and what isit?
I would you knew:
An if my face were but asfair as yours,
My favour were as great;be witness this.
Nay, I have verses too, Ithank Biron:
The numbers true; and,were the numbering too,
I were the fairest goddesson the ground:
I am compared to twentythousand fairs.
O, he hath drawn mypicture in his letter!
Any thing like?
Much in the letters;nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as ink; a goodconclusion.
But, Katharine, what was sentto you from fair Dumain?
Madam, this glove.
Did he not send you twain?
Yes, madam, and moreover
Some thousand verses of afaithful lover,
A huge translation ofhypocrisy,
Vilely compiled, profoundsimplicity.
This and these pearls tome sent Longaville:
The letter is too long byhalf a mile.
I think no less. Dost thounot wish in heart
The chain were longer andthe letter short?
Ay, or I would these handsmight never part.
We are wise girls to mockour lovers so.
They are worse fools topurchase mocking so.
That same Biron I'lltorture ere I go:
O that I knew he were butin by the week!
How I would make him fawnand beg and seek
And wait the season andobserve the times
And spend his prodigalwits in bootless rhymes
And shape his servicewholly to my hests
And make him proud to makeme proud that jests!
So perttaunt-like would Io'ersway his state
That he should be my fooland I his fate.
None are so surely caught,when they are catch'd,
As wit turn'd fool: folly,in wisdom hatch'd,
Hath wisdom's warrant andthe help of school
And wit's own grace tograce a learned fool.
The blood of youth burnsnot with such excess
As gravity's revolt towantonness.
O, I am stabb'd withlaughter! Where's her grace?
Thy news Boyet?
Prepare, madam, prepare!
Arm, wenches, arm!encounters mounted are
Against your peace: Lovedoth approach disguised,
Armed in arguments; you'llbe surprised:
Muster your wits; stand inyour own defence;
Or hide your heads likecowards, and fly hence.
Saint Denis to SaintCupid! What are they
That charge their breathagainst us? say, scout, say.
Under the cool shade of asycamore
I thought to close mineeyes some half an hour;
When, lo! to interrupt mypurposed rest,
Toward that shade I mightbehold addrest
The king and his companions:
warily I stole into aneighbour thicket by,
And overheard what youshall overhear,
That, by and by, disguisedthey will be here.
But what, but what, comethey to visit us?
They do, they do: and areapparell'd thus.
Like Muscovites orRussians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parle,to court and dance;
And every one hislove-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress,which they'll know
By favours several whichthey did bestow.
And will they so? thegallants shall be task'd;
For, ladies, we shallevery one be mask'd;
And not a man of themshall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see alady's face.
Hold, Rosaline, thisfavour thou shalt wear,
And then the king willcourt thee for his dear;
Hold, take thou this, mysweet, and give me thine,
So shall Biron take me forRosaline.
And change your favourstoo; so shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceived bythese removes.
Come on, then; wear thefavours most in sight.
But in this changing whatis your intent?
The effect of my intent isto cross theirs:
They do it but in mockingmerriment;
And mock for mock is onlymy intent.
Their several counselsthey unbosom shall
To loves mistook, and sobe mock'd withal
Upon the next occasionthat we meet,
With visages displayed, totalk and greet.
But shall we dance, ifthey desire to't?
No, to the death, we willnot move a foot;
Nor to their penn'd speechrender we no grace,
But while 'tis spoke eachturn away her face.
Why, that contempt willkill the speaker's heart,
And quite divorce hismemory from his part.
Therefore I do it; and Imake no doubt
The rest will ne'er comein, if he be out
There's no such sport assport by sport o'erthrown,
To make theirs ours andours none but our own:
So shall we stay, mockingintended game,
And they, well mock'd,depart away with shame.
(♪ trumpet)
The trumpet sounds: bemask'd; the maskers come.
All hail, the richestbeauties on the earth!--
A holy parcel of thefairest dames.
That ever turn'dtheir--backs--to mortal views!
Their eyes, villain, theireyes!
That ever turn'd their eyeson mortal views! --Out--
True; out indeed.
Boyet: What would thesestrangers? know their minds,
If they do speak ourlanguage, 'tis our will:
That some plain manrecount their purposes
Know what they would.
What would you with theprincess?
Nothing but peace andgentle visitation.
What would they, say they?
Why, that they have; andbid them so be gone.
She says, you have it, andyou may be gone.
Say to her, we havemeasured many miles
To tread a measure withher on this grass.
They say, that they havemeasured many a mile
To tread a measure withyou on this grass.
It is not so. Ask them howmany inches
Is in one mile: if theyhave measured many,
The measure then of one iseasily told.
If to come hither you havemeasured miles,
And many miles, theprincess bids you tell
How many inches doth fillup one mile.
Tell her, we measure themby weary steps.
She hears herself.
How many weary steps,
Of many weary miles youhave o'ergone,
Are number'd in the travelof one mile?
We number nothing that wespend for you:
Our duty is so rich, soinfinite,
That we may do it stillwithout accompt.
Vouchsafe to show thesunshine of your face,
That we, like savages, mayworship it.
My face is but a moon, andclouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to doas such clouds do!
Vouchsafe, bright moon, andthese thy stars, to shine,
Those clouds removed, uponour watery eyne.
O vain petitioner! beg agreater matter;
Thou now request'st butmoonshine in the water.
Then, in our measure dobut vouchsafe one change.
Thou bid'st me beg: thisbegging is not strange.
Play, music, then! Nay,you must do it soon.
Not yet! no dance! Thuschange I like the moon.
Will you not dance? Howcome you thus estranged?
You took the moon at full,but now she's changed.
Yet still she is the moon,and I the man.
The music plays; vouchsafesome motion to it.
Our ears vouchsafe it.
But your legs should doit.
Since you are strangersand come here by chance,
We'll not be nice:
Take hands.
We will not dance.
If you deny to dance,let's hold more chat.
In private, then.
I am best pleased withthat.
White-handed mistress, onesweet word with thee.
Honey, and milk, andsugar; there is three.
Nay then, two treys, andif you grow so nice,
Metheglin, wort, andmalmsey: well run, dice!
There's half-a-dozensweets.
Seventh sweet, adieu:
Since you can cog, I'llplay no more with you.
One word in secret.
Let it not be sweet.
Thou grievest my gall.
Gall! bitter.
Therefore meet.
Will you vouchsafe with meto change a word?
Name it.
Fair lady,--
Say you so? Fair lord,--
Take that for your fairlady.
Please it you,
As much in private, andI'll bid adieu.
What, was your vizard madewithout a tongue?
I know the reason, lady,why you ask.
O for your reason!quickly, sir; I long.
You have a double tonguewithin your mask,
And would afford myspeechless vizard half.
Veal, quoth the Dutchman.Is not 'veal' a calf?
A calf, fair lady!
No, a fair lord calf.
Let's part the word.
No, I'll not be your half
Take all, and wean it; itmay prove an ox.
Look, how you butt yourselfin these sharp mocks!
Will you give horns,chaste lady? do not so.
Then die a calf, beforeyour horns do grow.
One word in private withyou, ere I die.
Bleat softly then; thebutcher hears you cry.
The tongues of mockingwenches are as keen
As is the razor's edgeinvisible,
Cutting a smaller hairthan may be seen,
Above the sense of sense;so sensible
Seemeth their conference;their conceits have wings
Fleeter than arrows, bullets,wind, thought, swifter things.
Not one word more, my maids;break off, break off.
By heaven, all dry-beatenwith pure scoff!
Farewell, mad wenches; youhave simple wits.
Twenty adieus, my frozenMuscovits.
Are these the breed ofwits so wonder'd at?
Tapers they are, with yoursweet breaths puff'd out.
Well-liking wits they have;gross, gross; fat, fat.
O poverty in wit,kingly-poor flout!
Will they not, think you,hang themselves tonight?
Or ever, but in vizards,show their faces?
This pert Biron was out ofcountenance quite.
O, they were all inlamentable cases!
The king was weeping-ripefor a good word.
Biron did swear himselfout of all suit.
Dumain was at my service,and his sword:
No point, quoth I; myservant straight was mute.
Lord Longaville said, Icame o'er his heart;
And trow you what hecalled me?
Qualm, perhaps.
Yes, in good faith.
Go, sickness as thou art!
Well, better wits haveworn plain statute-caps.
But will you hear? theking is my love sworn.
And quick Biron hathplighted troth to me.
And Longaville was for myservice born.
Dumain is mine, as sure asbark on tree.
Madam, and prettymistresses, give ear:
Immediately they willagain be here
In their own shapes; forit can never be
They will digest thisharsh indignity.
Will they return?
They will, they will, Godknows,
And leap for joy, thoughthey are lame with blows:
Therefore change favours;and, when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses inthis summer air.
What shall we do,
If they return in theirown shapes to woo?
Good madam, if by meyou'll be advised,
Let's, mock them still, aswell known as disguised:
Let us complain to themwhat fools were here,
Disguised like Muscovites,in shapeless gear;
And wonder what they wereand to what end
Their shallow shows andprologue vilely penn'd
Fair sir, God save you!Where's the princess?
Gone to her tent. Pleaseit your majesty
Command me any service toher thither?
That she vouchsafe meaudience for one word.
I will; and so will she, Iknow, my lord.
This fellow pecks up witas pigeons pease,
And utters it again whenGod doth please:
He is wit's pedler, andretails his wares
At wakes and wassails,meetings, markets, fairs;
And we that sell by gross,the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace tograce it with such show.
This is the ape of form,monsieur the nice,
That, when he plays attables, chides the dice
In honourable terms: O, he can sing
A mean most meanly; and inushering
Mend him who can: theladies call him sweet;
The stairs, as he treadson them, kiss his feet:
This is the flower thatsmiles on every one,
To show his teeth as whiteas whale's bone;
And consciences, that willnot die in debt,
Pay him the due ofhoney-tongued Boyet.
A blister on his sweettongue, with my heart,
That put Armado's page outof his part!
See where it comes!Behavior, what wert thou
Till this madman show'dthee? and what art thou now?
All hail, sweet madam, andfair time of day!
'Fair' in 'all hail' isfoul, as I conceive.
Construe my speechesbetter, if you may.
Then wish me better; Iwill give you leave.
We came to visit you, andpurpose now
To lead you to our court;vouchsafe it then.
This field shall hold me;and so hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delightsin perjured men.
Rebuke me not for thatwhich you provoke:
The virtue of your eyemust break my oath.
You nickname virtue; viceyou should have spoke;
For virtue's office neverbreaks men's troth.
Now by my maiden honour,yet as pure
As the unsullied lily, Iprotest,
A world of torments thoughI should endure,
I would not yield to beyour house's guest;
So much I hate a breakingcause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vow'dwith integrity.
O, you have lived indesolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much toour shame.
Not so, my lord; it is notso, I swear;
We have had pastimes hereand pleasant game:
A mess of Russians left usbut of late.
How, madam! Russians!
Ay, in truth, my lord;
Trim gallants, full ofcourtship and of state.
Madam, speak true. It isnot so, my lord:
My lady, to the manner ofthe days,
In courtesy givesundeserving praise.
We four indeed confrontedwere with four
In Russian habit: herethey stay'd an hour,
And talk'd apace; and inthat hour, my lord,
They did not bless us withone happy word.
I dare not call themfools; but this I think,
When fools are thirsty,they would fain have drink.
This jest is dry to me.Fair gentle sweet,
Your wit makes wise thingsfoolish: when we greet,
With eyes best seeing,heaven's fiery eye,
By light we lose light:your capacity
Is of that nature that toyour huge store
Wise things seem foolishand rich things but poor.
This proves you wise andrich, for in my eye,--
I am a fool, and full ofpoverty.
But that you take whatdoth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatchwords from my tongue.
O, I am yours, and allthat I possess!
All the fool mine?
I cannot give you less.
Which of the vizards wasit that you wore?
Where? when? what vizard?why demand you this?
There, then, that vizard;that superfluous case
That hid the worse andshow'd the better face.
We are descried; they'llmock us now downright.
Let us confess and turn itto a jest.
Amazed, my lord? why looksyour highness sad?
Help, hold his brows! he'llswoon! Why look you pale?
Sea-sick, I think, comingfrom Muscovy.
Thus pour the stars downplagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass holdlonger out?
Here stand I, Lady, dart thyskill at me;
Bruise me with scorn,confound me with a flout;
Thrust thy sharp wit quitethrough my ignorance;
Cut me to pieces with thykeen conceit;
And I will wish thee nevermore to dance,
Nor never more in Russianhabit wait.
O, never will I trust tospeeches penn'd,
Nor to the motion of aschoolboy's tongue,
Nor never come in vizardto my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme, like ablind harper's song!
Taffeta phrases, silkenterms precise,
Three-piled hyperboles,spruce affectation,
Figures pedantical; thesesummer-flies
Have blown me full ofmaggot ostentation:
I do forswear them; and Ihere protest,
By this white glove;--howwhite the hand, God knows!--
Henceforth my wooing mindshall be express'd
In russet yeas and honestkersey noes:
And, to begin, wench,--soGod help me, la!--
My love to thee is sound,sans crack or flaw.
Sans sans, I pray you.
Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage: bear withme, I am sick;
I'll leave it by degrees.
These lords are visited;you are not free,
For the Lord's tokens onyou do I see.
No, they are free thatgave these tokens to us.
Our states are forfeit:seek not to undo us.
It is not so; for how canthis be true,
That you stand forfeit,being those that sue?
Peace! for I will not haveto do with you.
Nor shall not, if I do asI intend.
Speak for yourselves; mywit is at an end.
Teach us, sweet madam, forour rude transgression
Some fair excuse.
The fairest is confession.
Were not you here but evennow disguised?
Madam, I was.
And were you well advised?
I was, fair madam.
When you then were here,
What did you whisper inyour lady's ear?
That more than all theworld I did respect her.
When she shall challengethis, you will reject her.
Upon mine honour, no.
Peace, peace! forbear:
Your oath once broke, youforce not to forswear.
Despise me, when I breakthis oath of mine.
I will: and therefore keepit. Rosaline,
What did the Russianwhisper in your ear?
Madam, he swore that hedid hold me dear
As precious eyesight, anddid value me
Above this world; addingthereto moreover
That he would wed me, orelse die my lover.
God give thee joy of him!the noble lord
Most honourably dothunhold his word.
What mean you, madam? bymy life, my troth,
I never swore this ladysuch an oath.
By heaven, you did; and toconfirm it plain,
You gave me this: but takeit, sir, again.
My faith and this theprincess I did give:
I knew her by this jewelon her sleeve.
Pardon me, sir, this jeweldid she wear;
And Lord Biron, I thankhim, is my dear.
What, will you have me, oryour pearl again?
Neither of either; I remitboth twain.
I see the trick on't: herewas a consent,
Knowing aforehand of ourmerriment,
The ladies did changefavours: and then we,
Following the signs, woo'dbut the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to addmore terror,
We are again forsworn, inwill and error.
Much upon this it is: andmight not you
Forestall our sport, tomake us thus untrue?
Full merrily
Hath this brave manage,this career, been run.
Lo, he is tilting straight!Peace! I have done.
(♪ Loud drum)
Welcome, pure wit! thoupartest a fair fray.
O Lord, sir, they wouldknow
Whether the three Worthiesshall come in or no.
Go, bid them prepare.
We will turn it finely off,sir; we will take some care.
Biron, they will shame us:let them not approach.
We are shame-proof, mylord: and tis some policy
To have one show worse thanthe king's and his company.
I say they shall not come in.
Nay, my good lord, let meo'errule you now:
That sport best pleasesthat doth least know how:
Where zeal strives tocontent, and the contents
Dies in the zeal of thatwhich it presents:
Their form confoundedmakes most form in mirth,
When great things labouringperish in their birth.
A right description of oursport, my lord.
Anointed, I implore somuch of your
royal sweet breath as will uttera brace of words.
Doth this man serve God?
Why ask you?
He speaks not like a manof God's making.
That is all one, my fair,sweet, honey monarch; for,
I protest, the schoolmasteris exceeding fantastical;
too, too vain, too toovain: but we will put it,
as they say, tofortuna de la guerra.
I wish you the peace ofmind, most royal couplement!
Here is like to be a goodpresence of Worthies.
He presents Hector of Troy;the swain, Pompey the Great;
the parish curate,Alexander; Armado's page,
Hercules; the pedant,Judas Maccabaeus:
I Pompey am,--
You lie, you are not he.
With libbard's head onknee.
Well said, old mocker: I mustneeds be friends with thee.
I Pompey am, Pompeysurnamed the Big--
The Great.
It is, 'Great,' sir:--
Pompey surnamed the Great;
That oft in field, withtarge and shield,
did make my foe to sweat: Andtravelling along this coast,
I here am come bychance, And lay my arms
before the legs of thissweet lass of France,
If your ladyship would say,'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
Great thanks, greatPompey.
'Tis not so much worth;but I hope I was perfect:
I made a littlefault in 'Great.'
My hat to a halfpenny, Pompeyproves the best Worthy.
When in the world I lived, Iwas the world's commander;
Louder.
Shhh.
By east, west, north, and south,I spread my conquering might:
My scutcheon plain declaresthat I am Alisander,--
Your nose says, no, you arenot for it stands too right.
Your nose smells 'no' in this,most tender-smelling knight.
The conqueror is dismay'd.Proceed, good Alexander.
When in the world I lived, Iwas the world's commander,--
Most true, 'tis right; youwere so, Alisander.
Pompey the Great,--
Your servant, and Costard.
Take away the conqueror,take away Alisander.
O, sir, you haveoverthrown
Alisander the conqueror!
A conqueror, andafeard to speak!
Run away for shame,Alisander.
There, an't shall pleaseyou; a foolish mild man;
an honest man, lookyou, and soon dashed.
He is a marvellous goodneighbour, faith,
and a very good bowler:but, for Alisander,
--alas, you see how 'tis,--alittle o'erparted.
But there are Worthies a-coming
will speak their mindin some other sort.
Stand aside good Pompey.
Great Hercules ispresented by this imp,
Whose club kill'd Cerberus,that three-headed canis;
And when he was a babe, achild, a shrimp,
Thus did he strangleserpents in his manus.
Quoniam he seemeth inminority,
Ergo I come with thisapology.
Keep some state in thyexit, and vanish.
(laughing)
I, Judas am,--
A Judas!
(hissing)
Not Iscariot, sir.
Judas, yclipedMaccabaeus.
Judas Maccabaeus clipt isplain Judas.
I, Judas am,--
The more shame for you,Judas.
What mean you, sir?
To make Judas hanghimself.
Begin, sir; you are myelder.
Well followed: Judas washanged on an elder.
I will not be put out ofcountenance.
Because thou hast no face.
What is this?
A cittern-head.
The head of a bodkin.
A Death's face in a ring.
The face of an old Romancoin, scarce seen.
And now forward; for we haveput thee in countenance.
You have put me out ofcountenance.
False; we have given theefaces.
But you have out-facedthem all.
An thou wert a lion, wewould do so.
Therefore, as he is anass, let him go.
And so adieu, sweet Jude!nay, why dost thou stay?
For the latter end of hisname.
For the ass to the Jude;give it him:--Jud-as, away!
This is not generous, notgentle, not humble.
A light for Monsieur Judas! itgrows dark, he may stumble.
Alas, poor Maccabaeus, howhath he been baited!
Hide thy head, Achilles:here comes Hector in arms.
But is this Hector?
I think Hector was not soclean-timbered.
His leg is too big forHector's.
More calf, certain.
No; he is best endued inthe small.
This cannot be Hector.
He's a god or a painter;for he makes faces.
The armipotent Mars, oflances the almighty,
Gave Hector a gift,--
A gilt nutmeg.
A lemon.
Stuck with cloves.
No, cloven.
Peace!--
The armipotent Mars, oflances the almighty
Gave Hector a gift, theheir of Ilion;
A man so breathed, thatcertain he would fight; yea
From morn till night, from outof his pavilion.
I am that flower,--
That mint.
That columbine.
Sweet Lord Longaville,rein thy tongue.
I must rather give it the rein,for it runs against Hector.
Ay, and Hector's agreyhound.
The sweet war-man is deadand rotten; sweet chucks,
beat not the bones of theburied: when he breathed,
he was a man. But I willforward with my device.
Sweet royalty, bestow onme the benifit of hearing.
Speak, brave Hector: weare much delighted.
This Hector far surmountedHannibal,--
The party is gone, fellowHector, she is gone;
she is two months on her way.
What meanest thou?
Faith, unless you playthe honest Troyan,
the poor wench is castaway: she's quick;
the child brags in herbelly already: tis yours.
Dost thou infamonizeme among potentates?
thou shalt die.
Then shall Hector be whippedfor Jaquenetta that is
quick by him and hanged forPompey that is dead by him.
Most rare Pompey!
Renowned Pompey!
Greater than great, great,great, great Pompey!
Pompey the Huge!
Hector trembles.
By the north pole, I dochallenge thee.
I will not fight with apole, like a northern man:
I'll slash; I'll do it bythe sword. I bepray you,
let me borrow my armsagain.
Room for the incensedWorthies!
I'll do it in my shirt.
Most resolute Pompey!
Master, let me take youa buttonhole lower.
Do you not see Pompey isuncasing for the combat?
What mean you? You willlose your reputation.
Gentlemen andsoldiers, pardon me;
I will not combat in my shirt.
What reason have youfor't?
The naked truth of itis, I have no shirt;
I go woolward for penance.
(laughing)
God save you, madam!
Welcome, Mercade;
But that thou interrupt'stour merriment.
I am sorry, madam; for thenews I bring
Is heavy in my tongue. Theking your father--
Dead, for my life!
Even so; my tale is told.
Worthies, away! the scenebegins to cloud.
For mine own part, Ibreathe free breath.
I have seen the day of wrong
through the littlehole of discretion,
and I will right myselflike a soldier.
How fares your majesty?
Boyet, prepare; I willaway tonight.
Madam, not so; I dobeseech you, stay.
Prepare, I say. I thankyou, gracious lords,
For all your fairendeavors; and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul,that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom toexcuse or hide
The liberal opposition ofour spirits,
If over-boldly we haveborne ourselves
In the converse of breath:
Your gentleness was guilty ofit. Farewell worthy lord!
A heavy heart bears not animble tongue:
Excuse me so, coming tooshort of thanks
For my great suit soeasily obtain'd.
The extreme parts of timeextremely forms
All causes to the purposeof his speed,
And often at his veryloose decides
That which long processcould not arbitrate:
And though the mourningbrow of progeny
Forbid the smilingcourtesy of love
The holy suit which fainit would convince,
Yet, since love's argumentwas first on foot,
Let not the cloud ofsorrow justle it
From what it purposed;since, to wail friends lost
Is not by much sowholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friendsbut newly found.
I understand you not: mygriefs are double.
Honest plain words bestpierce the ear of grief;
For your fair sakes havewe neglected time,
Play'd foul play with ouroaths: your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deform'd us,fashioning our humours
Even to the opposed end ofour intents:
And what in us hath seem'dridiculous,--
As love is full ofunbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child,skipping and vain,
Form'd by the eye andtherefore, like the eye,
Full of strange shapes, ofhabits and of forms,
Varying in subjects as theeye doth roll
To every varied object inhis glance:
Which parti-coatedpresence of loose love
Put on by us, if, in yourheavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oathsand gravities,
Those heavenly eyes, thatlook into these faults,
Suggested us to make.Therefore, ladies,
Our love being yours, theerror that love makes
Is likewise yours: we toourselves prove false,
By being once false forever to be true
To those that make usboth,--fair ladies, you:
We have received yourletters full of love;
Your favours, theambassadors of love;
And, in our maiden council,
rated them at courtship,pleasant jest and courtesy,
As bombast and as liningto the time:
But more devout than thisin our respects
Have we not been; andtherefore met your loves
In their own fashion, likea merriment.
Our letters, madam, show'dmuch more than jest.
So did our looks.
We did not quote them so.
Now, at the latest minuteof the hour,
Grant us your loves.
A time, methinks, tooshort
To make a world-without-endbargain in.
No, no, my lord, yourgrace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness;and therefore this:
If for my love, as thereis no such cause,
You will do aught, thisshall you do for me:
Your oath I will nottrust; but go with speed
To some forlorn and nakedhermitage,
Remote from all thepleasures of the world;
There stay until thetwelve celestial signs
Have brought about theannual reckoning.
If this austere insociablelife
Change not your offer madein heat of blood;
If frosts and fasts, hardlodging and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudy blossomsof your love,
But that it bear thistrial and last love;
Then, at the expiration ofthe year,
Come challenge me, challengeme by these deserts,
And, by this virgin palmnow kissing thine
I will be thine; and tillthat instant shut
My woeful self up in amournful house,
Raining the tears oflamentation
For the remembrance of myfather's death.
If this thou do deny, letour hands part,
Neither entitled in theother's heart.
If this, or more thanthis, I would deny,
To flatter up these powersof mine with rest,
The sudden hand of deathclose up mine eye!
Hence ever then my heartis in thy breast.
But what to me, my love?but what to me? A wife?
A beard, fair health, andhonesty;
With three-fold love Iwish you all these three.
O, shall I say, I thankyou, gentle wife?
Not so, my lord; atwelvemonth and a day
I'll mark no words thatsmooth-faced wooers say:
Come when the king doth tomy lady come;
Then, if I have much love,I'll give you some.
I'll serve thee true andfaithfully till then.
Yet swear not, lest ye beforsworn again.
What says Maria?
At the twelvemonth's end
I'll change my black gownfor a faithful friend.
Studies my lady? mistress,look on me;
Behold the window of myheart, mine eye,
What humble suit attendsthy answer there:
Impose some service on mefor thy love.
Oft have I heard of you,my Lord Biron,
Before I saw you; and theworld's large tongue
Proclaims you for a manreplete with mocks,
Full of comparisons andwounding flouts,
Which you on all estateswill execute
That come within the mercyof your wit.
To weed this wormwood fromyour fruitful brain,
And therewithal to win me,if you please,
Without the which I am notto be won,
You shall this twelvemonthterm from day to day
Visit the speechless sickand still converse
With groaning wretches;and your task shall be,
With all the fierceendeavor of your wit
To enforce the painedimpotent to smile.
To move wild laughter inthe throat of death?
It cannot be; it isimpossible:
Mirth cannot move a soulin agony.
Why, that's the way tochoke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begotof that loose grace
Which shallow laughinghearers give to fools:
A jest's prosperity liesin the ear
Of him that hears it,never in the tongue
Of him that makes it:then, if sickly ears,
Deaf'd with the clamoursof their own dear groans,
Will hear your idlescorns, continue then,
And I will have you andthat fault withal;
But if they will not,throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you emptyof that fault,
Right joyful of yourreformation.
A twelvemonth! well;befall what will befall,
I'll jest a twelvemonth inan hospital.
And so I take my leave.
No, madam; we will bringyou on your way.
Our wooing doth not endlike an old play;
Jack hath not Jill: theseladies' courtesy
Might well have made oursport a comedy.
Come, sir, it wants atwelvemonth and a day,
And then 'twill end.
That's too long for aplay.
Sweet majesty, vouchsafeme,--
Was not that Hector?
The worthy knight of Troy.
I will kiss thy royalfinger, and take leave.
I am a votary; I havevowed to Jaquenetta
to hold the plough for hersweet love three years.
But, most esteemed greatness,will you hear the dialogue
that the two learned menhave compiled in praise
of the owl and the cuckoo?
It should have followedin the end of our show.
Call them forth quickly;we will do so.
(♪ singing)
♪ When daisies pied andviolets blue
And lady-smocks allsilver-white
And cuckoo-buds of yellowhue
Do paint the meadows withdelight,
The cuckoo then, on everytree,
Mocks married men; forthus sings he, Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word offear,
Unpleasing to a marriedear!
When icicles hang by thewall
And Dick the shepherdblows his nail
And Tom bears logs intothe hall
And milk comes frozen homein pail,
When blood is nipp'd andways be foul,
Then nightly sings thestaring owl, Tu-whit;
Tu-who, a merry note,
While greasy Joan dothkeel the pot.
While Joan dothkeel the pot. ♪
The words of Mercury are harshafter the songs of Apollo.
You that way: we this way.
(singing)